Okay. We’re going to take a step back and recalibrate the
spec from ground up.

The principle is straightforward. It’s a trolley-problem
simulator that begins extremely innocuous, slowly becomes more sinister, and
reveals itself as a dark, insidious, oppressive AI safety parable. The tonal
trajectory is intended to be: lighthearted curiosity to off-putting academic to
twisted comedy to dark and disturbing to dawning horror dystopian.

The idea is to base this on:

1.    
Real trolley problem scenarios and variations
(that involve the controller). The goal is to show some genuine thought and
engage with some of the actual philosophical dilemmas ever since Judis Jarvis
Thomson gifted the world with the trolley problem and how they’ve evolved. Take
some of the inspiration from MIT’s Moral Machine project, which should inspire
this meaningfully, but obviously this is intended to be a little bit more
abstract and a little bit less about self-driving cars.

2.    
Real literature, especially recent literature,
on AI Doomsday scenarios. For this, I would look at: “If Anyone Builds it,
Everyone Dies” (copy on this local machine), the MIT 12 AI Aftermath Scenarios,
the AI 2027 paper (both of the latter taken online). The idea is for the
trolley problem to be woven into this. It should look at real published
research on AI Safety dilemmas, tradeoffs, and problems that real researchers
would face. This should be interwoven with the trolley problem such that it
becomes something like decision gates that procedurally lead to certain
outcomes. I would probably take some inspiration from the 12 AI Aftermath
Scenarios, AI 2027, or other scenario predictions as the end-states, with certain
flexible parameters that are run-customized. Will dive deeper into this later.

The idea is for it to be legitimately publishable-grade as
both a) a video game, b) a high-tech webpage, c) a thesis/capstone project, d)
a research paper. I will talk about each of these dimensions in some more
detail.

First, on the video game aspect, as this is easier to
discuss.

The goal is for the experience to be legitimately immersive.
This means graphical fidelity, smooth animations, varied icons, bespoke
animations, and extremely dedicated and consistent design philosophy.

Fundamentally, the gameplay loop is simple. Scenario posed
in front of the trolley controller. The player picks one of two options. This is
so simple that there are many intensely creative ways to mess around with it
and vary it. We will get to those. But, fundamentally, we have to make this
part of the experience as immersive and high-fidelity as possible, just because
getting this perfect means that the rest of the project lands. If this isn’t
good enough, then the rest of the project is pointless.

With that established, I’ll share my vision for the primary
interface.

Constant layer:

·     
Start screen. Minimal information, just a brief
overview that run data would be collected. Run data is collected from when
someone presses “Start”. Polished, sophisticated video game start screen.

·     
Rear view of the trolley controller. From
something like inside the control cabin. Side view mirrors visible, a control
screen visible, perhaps a radio for comms. The lever to switch tracks, of
course, prominently. This perhaps should be the primary handle. Move left to
right.

·     
Standard animations of moving left or right.
Smooth. Seamless.

·     
Constant motion. The tracks are always
progressing. Figures come into view seamlessly as the animation switches. No
jerks, no back to center, nothing. The scene should rotate, the trolley should
always stay centered.

·     
A little region perhaps in the top right that
shows statistics. For instance, “X% of players also chose to pull the lever.”

Later introduced layers:

·     
Scrolling news feed. Fictionalized news updates
about what’s happening in the world state. This would include updates on
geopolitics, elections, wars, natural disasters, electricity prices, inflation,
the economy, Senate races, etc. All fictionalized with fictional names and
fictional flags and everything. This might even include statements from
fictionalized frontier AI lab CEOs, world leaders, etc. Fictionalized “Twitter”
posts, and more. Fictionalized news on murderbots, unemployment rates, curing
cancer, discovery of the graviton, construction of data centers, etc. AI swarms,
cybersecurity attacks, control of military assets, digital concerts, declining
birth rates due to AI partners, physics breakthroughs, virtual reality, robot
fleets, announcement of AGI/RSI/ASI, partnerships, moratoriums, AI circular
financing, VC investments, civil unrest, protests, mass unemployment, prominent
researchers committing suicide, mass resignations from frontier lab employees,
announcement of first $10 trillion market cap company, mergers, nationalization
of AI labs, etc. I think perhaps a scrolling Twitter feed as a whole, with
updated dates? And each thing is just a headline with fictional graphics for
thumbnails, fictional logos for news sites, etc.

·     
The replacement of comms board or whatever in
the cabin with a little digital assistant. This should look like a
mini-ChatGPT/Claude web window. This is one of the most interesting elements of
what I can envision. As we get to later decisions, they might become more ambiguous
and more abstract. It is obviously not going to run a literal LLM, and instead
will have pre-determined multi-choice questions and pre-determined answers. For
instance, as questions become more vague, you might ask this fictional LLM (come
up with some plausible fictional name and a plausible fictional logo, too) what
the implications of each option are, or what it recommends you do. It might have
increasingly sinister and aggressive responses over time.

Dynamic layers:

·     
After a certain point, there might be a GDP bar,
an AI progress bar, a fatalities/casualties bar, etc. This kind of dashboard
should be dynamic depending on the choices that the player makes. It should
also have a fixed location on the screen, but since it’s introduced later it
should also be in a region that is otherwise empty.

·     
The side-view mirror where you might see the controller’s
face. As the world state worsens, the controller’s face morphs. But this would
not just be world-state dependent. Perhaps there are general “stages”, and each
stage would represent a change. So, for instance, an ordinary smile to begin
with. The first time the controller comes across the actual trolley problem and
encounters death, it becomes a blank face. Then as the world state worsens,
more wrinkles, a more depressed face, more distress, eyes beginning to tear up,
eyebags, etc. Progressively worsening.

·     
Rails speed up. When the controller first
encounters a “capability jump” decision with AI development, the rails speed
up. It should be progressive, slow, extremely subtle, and should only become
really obvious that the rails have been speeding up all along the entire time
when the player is many, many questions in. Obviously, some sort of visual cap
on base speed vs. final speed, but it should be gradual and almost
unnoticeable.

·     
Environment worsens. Perhaps it’s initially cows
grazing, rivers, trees, fields, etc. to the sides of the track, and then slowly
it becomes less populous, the trees start losing leaves, the ground becomes
cracked, the clouds become darker, eventually lightning starts flashing by. The
environment should degrade slowly, noticeably. Perhaps if the trolley runs over
people, the windshield starts developing small, subtle cracks that become
imperceptibly larger over the course of the game.

·     
Graphical glitches and “bugs”. Perhaps at one
random question, the game freezes. The whole visual stops, for just 2 seconds,
and then continues as normal. Perhaps the game resets to a better-looking time
period. Perhaps the fictional LLM logo flashes red just once. Perhaps the LLM’s
response to a question goes from something really ominous and evil and
concerning to perfectly normal. More ideas.

Design elements:

·     
Almost entirely white screen, black
line-drawings for all graphical assets, color where needed for visual effect.
Should look like high-quality video game assets with this particular artistic
conceit in mind.

·     
Highly polished, sophisticated font use. Almost
entirely frontier tech-adjacent sans serif. Typewriter font for certain
elements.

·     
Minimal commentary. Let the game’s ludonarrative
serve itself.

·     
Blood splatters or other viscera for impact.

·     
Music (open-license type) that starts off calm
and slowly becomes haunting and ominous over time. Low-volume, unobtrusive,
purely atmospheric.

Potential twists and turns:

·     
At one point, the lever jams. Repeatedly
pressing the lever for a critical decision returns an error, and there is only one
path.

·     
“Bad” outcomes don’t end the game. It keeps
going. For instance, nuclear war happens. The trolley keeps going. Things can
get worse. Yes, eventually there is a game over, and the results of the game
state should be presented to the player based on the variety of different
static outcome templates + dynamic changes based on decisions, but
nevertheless.

·     
Eventually the news feed becomes all bots,
maybe.

·     
Some way to demonstrate that we’ve outsourced
our decisions entirely to the fictional LLM.

·     
Things can get worse or better. Game state does
update to reflect this. But generally this is an anti race PSA.

·     
Eventually, the questions become highly
technical and verbose. Perhaps distinguishing between two highly sophisticated
choices, which then become relevant since we now need the fictional LLM
assistant to delineate between the two choices.

Moving onto the webpage conception of this project:

·     
This should look like it was published by
genuinely competent, professional high-tech devs, and the entire game should
run flawlessly on GitHub pages. See how far we can push this. Fonts,
animations, links.

·     
Perhaps hovering over highlighted words, or
clicking expand on the history of dilemmas, etc. reveals text boxes with more
information. Each web element should work extremely well.

On the capstone/thesis conception:

There are two ways that this can be interpreted. One is as a
philosophy of AI/AI safety thesis, and the other is a CS/web design/game design
capstone. Both are equally important.

Common ideas:

·     
This should be well researched. Hyperlinks to
relevant articles (perhaps where discussing LLM improvement strategies, or
statements made in real life by world leaders/tech executives, etc.), drawing
from research from AI 2027 or Yudkowsky’s book, etc. Other factoids should also
be present to support updates to the world state, like unemployment numbers,
GDP numbers, revenue figures, potential life sciences benefits, other economic
numbers, probabilities, p-doom, etc.

AI Safety Thesis:

·     
This is not unideological or unserious. This is
intended to be a legitimately well-researched AI safety project, showing real
problems and scenarios through gamification. It is deliberately intended as a
warning. Do not soften it, do not be afraid of taking risks.

·     
It should draw from real analyses on AI
development scenarios, existential threat literature, research from frontier
labs, output from AI safety nonprofits, and more. There should be real
investigation of all of the fictional news ideas I mentioned above, but also on
legitimate ML research.

Technical Capstone:

·     
Liberty can be taken with numbers and figures.
Where provenance is uncertain, that’s fine. It’s an artistic choice to say X
choice will lead to 10 million deaths, or represent GDP numbers with an
arbitrary number of digits. You should feel very comfortable taking artistic
license with the game elements itself, including the news stories, the LLM’s
responses, etc.

·     
I imagine that this would require thinking
deeply about what the game state would represent. There are probably static
elements, and then dynamic elements that would combine to form a unique game
state every single time. For example, where certain trolley dilemmas are
presented as “X with certainty, or Y with A% probability”, assign that an
actual probability of being reflected in the game state, perhaps in news
updates or reflected in the environment. Perhaps a fading banner might be
incorporated that reveals factoids about the world state.

·     
There should be different stages. I’m imagining
anywhere from 5-8 different stages of the game. The first stage would be
common, where it’s just lighthearted trolley problem questions. The second
stage would also be common, where it’s real trolley problem variations and
philosophical investigations. The third stage would transition to AI-adjacent
questions, and progress more plainly to becoming about AI safety as time goes
on. This would start having impacts from stage 4 onwards, where outcomes can
progress differently depending on the choices that the player makes. Some games
would only go to stage 5, because the right choices were made and the right
probabilities were rolled, and this would end things well, or alternatively
they’d only go to stage 5 because all the suddenly bad options were made and
all the bad probabilities were rolled. Others would progress as the game goes
on, and some games would have much longer stages. The length of each stage is
not intended to be identical. Stage 1 might only have 4-5 questions from a
question bank of 11-12 questions, stage 2 might only have 4-5 from a question
bank of 15-20, stage 3 onwards might have anywhere between 5-10 questions from
a question bank of vastly more, and so on. The ranges within these might also
be dynamic, so no game feels identical.

·     
You would also want to think about which visual
elements start coming in at which stages. Perhaps certain updates to the world
happen only in responses to certain questions, perhaps certain updates (like
the introduction of the LLM) are fixed at a stage transition. Perhaps certain
updates happen dynamically within stages.

·     
I would also imagine that the relevant data
would be response per question. I expect that certain questions would be posed
to every player (for instance, the canonical trolley problem, and then others
around AI safety), but not every player would respond to every question,
naturally. Thus, the top-right statistics might only begin showing when there
is a certain threshold of responses acquired, like 20, so that a meaningful
percentage can be shown. For final game states, perhaps a variety of templates
for different metrics?

On the research paper conception:

·     
This should be thoroughly well-designed enough
and well-researched enough that it could serve, on its own, as a worthy artifact/demonstration/repo
for AI safety jobs or for AI safety PhD research. Thus, the quality bar is
exceptionally high.

I would imagine that execution on this would span a few
different phases across a few different domains.

The most critical is not the visual design element, but the
research element. The question bank must be established. A database should
attach different factoids, probabilities, news updates, etc. all to
responses/outcomes of different questions. I would call each question a “node”.
Thus, each node should be extremely well-defined so that there is no overlap.

Then, we get to the dynamical updates. Tying this together
procedurally is important. In principle, I should be able to run this game
entirely as a yes/no game where each node produces a JSON artifact, no visual
interaction required. The visual elements come on top of this.

Once this entire part of the project is routed appropriately,
we would then need to establish an asset library. However many assets and asset
variations you think would be needed, I imagine that the actual number would be
an order of magnitude higher. There are dozens of icons, flags, logos, line-drawings,
etc. all on their own, and then the variations of those would be massive.

Beyond the asset library, we’d have to figure out how to reflect
that in the world. A kind of quasi-procedural generation and whatnot, possibly,
alongside the other static or dynamic updates.